the way it ought to be.
We were talking about final review.
We were pretty high off the ground.
We really felt that we were about to take over the world.
You know, that finally really smart people were going to be in charge of the Corps of Cadets.
And while we were tolerant of our upperclassmen, we were on occasion were critical of them.
But more seriously, it was a lot of celebration, a lot of happiness.
And you had senior boots.
Where did you acquire your senior boots?
I bought used boots.
How much did they cost?
$45, $50, something like that.
In fact, I met a guy recently that bought my old boots, but I sold mine at the end of the senior year.
So you passed them on.
Yeah.
And your senior ring, how much did it cost?
I just don't know.
Less than $50, $70 in that range, something like that.
Do you have any good senior ring stories?
No.
Not really, but I do remember that you didn't wear that ring in the latter final review.
You just didn't do it at all.
And I actually got my ring because I'd gone to summer school one time.
I had possession of my ring the second semester of my junior year.
And it would have been death if I'd ever been caught wearing the thing.
So I'd walk around with my hand in my pocket and my ring on just because I was so proud of having it.
go home to Dallas, I'd somehow sneak it on and wear it, being extremely careful because some Aggie didn't see me.
Did you get caught?
Never got caught.
I just knew that some Aggie was going to catch me.
When Sally and I would drive to the movie, I'd wear the ring and take it off when we went to the movie.
It was different than it is now.
What about in the years since then, any special times when someone recognized the ring?
Do you remember any examples of that?
Yeah, there was a very special one.
You know, the Zachary family and how important they've been to A&M.
I did a year of post-graduate study at Johns Hopkins in academic year 64, 65.
And in spring of 65, a friend of mine and I were at a meeting in northern Italy.
in a town called Bressanone.
It's up in the Austrian kind of mixed area of northern Italy.
That friend and another friend decided to go to Venice.
So we got on a train out of Bressanone like midnight going south to Venice.
We sat in a compartment and there was a lady in that compartment and she kept
My two friends were Chinese and we were talking like you will do.
I noticed she kept looking at me and finally she said, is that an Aggie ring?
It was Bartel Zachary's mother, H.P.
Zachary's wife.
He met the train in Venice.
He was there on business or something.
Last time I ever saw him, of course, last time I ever saw her, but I'd known him as a student.
He was quite visible on campus.
I think he became a regent about the time I graduated.
He was a regent part of that time.
Why have senior rings remained, why have Aggie rings remained such a mark of this institution?
Well, I think it's a combination of things.
I think the all-male, like the history of the place in terms of military, I think the...
poorly understood culture of the place, that we value tradition and things don't change.
I think the fact that there's only been one ring, you know, there's not four or five different choices when you graduate, and there's been a discipline about you don't get the ring until you have a certain number of hours.
You know, some universities, you can go to any store near the campus and buy a ring, and the rings lose their identity.
There are several conversions of it.
I'm grinning because when I was president at UTEP,
One day we were talking about this.
I had a UT System meeting in Austin.
I walked down Congress Avenue.
I walked into a jewelry store and asked them if I could buy a graduation ring from the University of Texas.
They asked me,
pay for it with cash or credit, and what design would you like on the ring?
Not only could I buy one, there were umpteen choices.
In a lot of places that way.
But if you look at places that have protected their ring, it has evolved over time.
The ring takes on greater importance.
Rice protects its ring.
Rice, in the old days when I was there and when you were there, if somebody got a ring and then, say, dropped out of school, Rice would go after them and want the ring back.
A&M, theoretically, you get the ring, it's yours, even though you've got your 70-some-odd hours or 90 hours, I guess it is.
Theoretically, you could walk and not ever graduate.
And as far as I'm aware, the only schools today that still treasure the ring are the academies, a few Ivy League-type schools, and A&M, maybe Clemson, Virginia Tech.
There aren't many of them there.
Many, though, that are trying to get back.
Oklahoma State, I understand, is trying to create a unique ring and set some standards for it.
Of course, it'll be generations before that takes on the identity.
In recent years, have you detected any degeneration in interest in the ring?
I have not.
I think it's intensified.
What I think has happened to A&M is that certain icons have become more important as the place has become more of a comprehensive university with a diverse population, men, women, and so forth.
I think some of the icons have taken on more important.
Some social scientists claim this is common in culture.
As changes occur, you lock on to certain icons and they take greater value.
Some people interpreted the intense interest in the bonfire as an example of that.
It's a relic from our past, in some sense, and it's symbolic of that past.
What are the other events that are important in this Aggie spirit or pride?
You know, that is too complicated I think for a dumb engineer to answer.
Our ability to change but not change is kind of something that's hard to understand.
The place has changed dramatically, but we've always had a certain affection for each other as a family.
It's always been pretty solid academically, and maybe in places where we didn't achieve sort of academic excellence in the sort of Harvard-MIT sense, we certainly had rigor and demanding programs.
I think that's kind of our conservative nature.
And people remember and value that experience.
They relate back to it and associate with it.
But the thing which is really peculiar is that the old Aggies can come back now and see things which they relate to.
That the icons are still there.
And what are those icons?
Well, people speak to you.
the respect that we show for the place we are, it's clean, we're kind to each other, the symbolic things like the core, the way they look, the way they present themselves, the yell leaders, all those kinds of things basically have not changed.
Now, someday those yells will be delivered by a woman, maybe more than one, but it will look the same in one sense.
The band looks the same.
Our silver taps, bonfire, midnight yell practice.
Midnight yell practice changed a lot.
Silver taps hadn't changed.
The bonfire engrossed hadn't changed.
Detail changed a lot.
The muster really hadn't changed much.
What about commencement where every name is called and every hand shaken?
It hadn't changed, and it's wonderful.
It's in danger.
It really is.
If you go to commencement Friday, there will be, start out with 1,100 or 1,200 people sitting there, and if it's like the last one, 200 of them will be left at the end of the day.
Let me turn this off.
We were talking about the key parts of what A&M really is.
What is A&M spirit?
Well, I don't think anybody can define it.
It's an affection for the place.
It's the feeling of family and the closeness people feel towards each other and by implication towards the place.
The spirit, whatever it is, is the driver for all these traditions.
As John Hagler explained it better than I can, it's the manifestation of the spirit.
That's why the traditions change, but the spirit is the commonality.
I think it has its roots in things like young men having to march off to World War II.
I think it has its roots in people coming off the farms in Texas and being transformed by this education.
I think it has to do with a lot of sort of intangible kinds of things that have occurred over the history of the university.
And the irony of it is a lot of these things have occurred at other places, but somehow it's had a different effect here.
And no one would, I think, ever have expected any of these elements of the university to be strong today, having their origins back in this small all-male university that sort of matured in the 30s and the 40s and the 50s.
During your era, was there a mix in the student body in terms of the kinds of families from which your fellow students came?
Mixed geographically, everybody was kind of middle class, poor, very few signs of wealth.
There were not a huge but a significant number of Hispanic kids here, but you never talked about this Mexican guy down in the hall or something.
The culture was so strong and your class system was so strong that basically you try to find your friends and survive.
And some Jewish kids.
Yeah, some Jewish kids, sure.
Not many international.
I couldn't identify one if I had to now, but I'm sure there were some.
And did students have nicknames for each other?
Everybody had nicknames.
What was yours?
I'll never tell you.
Oh, okay.
Can you share the nicknames of some others?
Well, John Hagler and I have a deal.
He won't tell mine if I won't tell his.
What about some others that are tellable?
Well, there's a guy that we call Smutch.
His name is Jack Nelson, who's not active at A&M now.
I've talked with him one time since I've been back.
But really everybody had nicknames.
And those nicknames generally were acquired here, sometimes justifiably and sometimes otherwise.
Well, it depends on who you ask, but most times there was justification for them.
And were used kind of within the Aggie family.
Oh, definitely.
I think probably everybody on the Corps' staff had a nickname.
There was this one wonderful guy named Jim Groves, and he's got a prominent nose, and he was Hose Nose.
Was what?
Hose Nose.
Hose Nose, okay.
And if I talk to him today, he's Hose Nose.
And, you know, I may talk to him once every ten years, and you revert back to that.
Your senior year then as you're on your, what was your, you were deputy?
Deputy Corps Command.
When did you learn you were going to be?
When I learned I wasn't going to be corps commander, it was automatic that you became, they had the commandant and his staff had an interview process and of course they've been watching you all year long and so forth and they made the selection based on that interviews and their accumulation of information.
And when John got to be corps commander, I was automatically dead.
And they interviewed how many?
They interviewed all the corps staff juniors, whether it's that five or six that I remember.
And again, as far as you're aware, it was done equitably?
Yeah, I think so.
There was speculation that they tried to alternate Army, Air Force, and that seemed to be kind of the pattern.
But we were never challenging or, let's say, uncomfortable or critical of the process.
And the choice had no effect on your friendship with John?
Not really, not really.
Not at all.
Then as seniors, were you all roommates?
Yeah.
Was there ever any time when you had to fill in for him as deputy?
Yeah, occasionally.
He was always constantly being asked to appear at some kind of public event.
If he couldn't, I would go.
We were sort of in tandem for most situations.
And it's during that year that you all meet Mr. Rutter.
Yeah.
In some sense, the corps commander had a lot of sort of external public kind of responsibilities, and the deputy corps commander was more of the internal kind of person, probably like it is now.
What were some of the internal corps problems you all had to work with?
Actually, I guess the one I was laughing about was my junior year.
We did a terrible thing.
The tradition was the week before the SMU game, the freshmen were Spurs, and I guess now they do it for the Tech game since we don't play SMU anymore.
At one of those ball games, the week before the SUU game, we were juniors.
And we thought the sophomores had done something inappropriate in Kyle Field.
They sort of did something insulting, which I can't remember now what it was.
So we made the sophomores wear Spurs.
And that was a tough one for them.
And the core staff juniors really caused that to happen.
And somehow I ended up in kind of the focus of that.
But I've met people in recent times that they're still mad at me for making them wear spurs when they were sophomores.
Was there any attempt at retaliatory action by sophomores?
Yeah, they've made valiant efforts to steal our blouses before the junior ball and stuff.
That was also one of those perverse traditions.
If as a sophomore you didn't try, you're a bunch of sissies.
But if you did it, you're in deep trouble.
You're faced with some ambiguity there.
My senior year, there was a...
Nothing a major thing.
Some concerns.
There was a lawsuit attempting to force the university to admit women, and we were concerned about the implication of that.
As a student then, what did you and your buddies think about the admission of women?
Oh, it was terrible.
It was the end of the earth.
And I'll tell you, because I don't think this is going to get too broadly distributed, is that there's a photograph of me in a Houston newspaper in my uniform expressing great concern about admitting women to A&M.
And one of my nightmares is that when I'm president of A&M, somebody will find that.
I think the chances are slim.
This is a paper that's long went out of business.
Did anyone ever mention racial integration during that era?
Never.
I certainly wasn't aware of it.
That would have been an easier issue to address and react to positively than letting in women.
again require compulsory membership in the Corps was made your senior year?
As we were going out.
And what was the reaction to that?
I think it actually occurred about as we graduated.
We were pleased with it.
We thought that was the natural state of affairs and thought that assured the Corps of Cadets from that point forward.
I think it happens now, but what happened then, as seniors, we were pretty confident that we knew everything.
The first semester was sort of defined by us being very much with the program, very supportive of the university administration and everything that was happening, very much team players.
We became so expert, we became critics in the spring.
We could see our time ending.
And we began to have concerns about the future of what we were doing and the future of the university and questions about the strength of our academics and everything.
So we became more critical and cynical, I think, toward the spring.
And so we were watching very closely what the board was doing with the Corps and this lawsuit and things like that.
How well prepared did you and your colleagues think you were for the real world?
See, I went straight to graduate school.
And frankly, I had a shock.
I went to Caltech to work on a master's degree in mechanical engineering.
And I felt somewhat disadvantaged.
I felt like that the preparation I had for what I confronted out there was really not very good.
But what did you think it was before you got there?
I was concerned, quite frankly.
The perception in those days that mechanical engineering was not as progressive as it should be.
I think Dr. Semang was the only PhD on the faculty, and it seemed to be about a half generation behind.
It was sort of the perception we had.
And I hit this shock when I got to Caltech.
I became convinced of that.
Now, frankly, looking back at it in a more realistic way, I think they gave me the fundamentals, and I frankly made very good grades at Caltech.
And I don't think I would have done that if I'd been as poorly prepared as I perceived I would.
What else did A&M do well as you look back?
I think the leadership responsibility you got, you're allowed to make mistakes.
You're allowed to take on complicated decisions.
One of the things that we became involved with my senior year was an effort to get an honor code in the Corps.
It was not successful.
The culture just wouldn't support it.
In that debate, all that year long, I probably learned as much about human nature and the way people articulate their concerns as I did any time in my life.
So the fact that the core culture would let young people sort of engage something like that and attempt something like that, I thought was, I think, significant.
Learning to deal with people, learning all different kinds of people in stressful situations as well as fun situations.
Of course, I think everybody gets that to an extent when they're young and in college.
By the time you were a senior, were there any key faculty or staff members to whom you turned for counsel?
Dr. Semang got to be a good friend, and that was reinforced when I came back as a graduate student.
I really developed those faculty connections more as a graduate student than I did as an undergraduate.
You know, there were people here.
Mr. Penberthy was a very good friend.
Carl Wilkins, the assistant commandant, became a good friend, someone I had great respect for.
And there was no international conflict or anything that was hanging over a brief period?
There was Sputnik.
I forget the exact date of Sputnik, but there was great concern.
I think it may have occurred as soon as we were leaving here.
Dr. Harrington became a good friend.
our senior year, of course, he was president, and he lived right across the street from Durham 12.
Actually, I got to know him as a junior.
We were in Durham 2 my senior year.
Mrs. Harrington was a
got to know Sally.
She was a mutual friend.
Sally got to know Mrs. Herrington.
We thought she was the best looking older woman we'd ever seen in our lives.
She was probably 40 years old at the time.
He was such a kind, nice person.
John and I got to know him pretty well.
And he was always, his office was open to us and everything.
And I can remember seeing him when I was a graduate student.
He was just a fine person.
Grown up in Plano, so he would, as a beginning faculty member, when he used to come to speak at the awards thing, we used to always chuckle.
He pronounced the word so-sation.
The so-sation of former students.
Yeah.
Everything else was perfect, perfect, perfect, but he had that special pronunciation.
As you look back, what else did you learn?
from those four years at A&M?
Well, I think it's the thing we talked about.
I think sort of how to deal with people is probably the most important lesson.
Obviously, I learned some discipline in my studies and I learned how to confront the academics in a successful way.
But being able to deal with people, making friends, resolving conflicts,
You're not yet married, but probably getting close to it.
We got married July after I graduated.
Sally graduated from SMU in three years.
Describe final review and commencement and who came and what was it like?
It was a lot of fun.
My family was there.
Of course, Sally was there.
We were sad.
The year had ended too fast.
One thing that happened then that's different now, though, we left almost immediately.
Within an hour and a half or two after final review, we were in the car gone.
Now they'll sit around and talk for a couple days and sort of disengage very slowly.
Do you even remember who the commencement speaker was?
No.
The commencement was held?
In G. Raleigh.
I can remember getting out of my seat, going up on the stage, and walking across it, getting it upon.
But I have no idea who the speaker was.
And I'm a believer that
A very, very important part of A&M's strong feelings is that name being called, that hand being shaken, and it's the real diploma.
I believe it would be a very great mistake to say, I hereby confer.
We'll change that under great duress.
We won't do it frivolously.
we're probably going to put that out there as a speculation trying to get people to think about it, think about what they're doing by leaving the arena.
I believe that if the last official event
If the individual is recognized, and if it's a pleasant experience, then it's warm.
If there's a snafu, a foul-up, then it all goes bad.
The example I would give would be what Jarvis failed to do when Melody Zintgraf 20 years ago this spring.
I was seated next to Bill Hobby who had been the speaker and she was standing that close to us when Jarvis didn't shake her hand.
Her family thought we had deliberately connived to make her the last of the last of the last.
It was the Saturday morning, Friday afternoon, Friday night, Saturday morning.
She was in biomedical science, veterinary medicine.
You graduate by alphabetical order, by college, by major, by name.
So she was the last one to graduate.
I didn't realize that.
She was the last one to walk across the state.
All that public attention was drawn there.
See, I often wondered with all that rush up there, people coming by, how anybody would notice except this little small group up close.
But you see, if you're out in the audience, you're saying, okay, come on, we're about ready to go.
And then there was hissing.
And I was sitting next to Hobby because he had said, come, let's chat.
When you get out there to UTEP, stay in touch.
We've known each other 20 years.
Maybe I can help you with a special item.
Well, I was really impressed.
And I'm getting ready to go back to my seat, and I hear some hissing.
And I said, oh, my goodness.
He said, what do you mean?
I said, they're hissing the couriest.
That means they don't like something.
And I glance to my right, and I see her.
And I called her by name and he said, oh, she's been a pain in my neck.
She's complained so much.
Good gracious.
Well, I wouldn't dare get up then.
Jarvis hands her her diploma.
She takes it in her right hand.
moves it to her left, then puts her hand out, and he then says, in my memory, no way I'm going to shake your hand.
Well, everybody kind of goes, Brian Cole, whom I just interviewed this morning, was one of the name callers, and he said he noticed one regent turned to another and said, that's it, that's it.
When we got back to the Letterman's Lounge, I remember a number of people saying, Serves are right, I wouldn't shake her hand, she's been a pain in our neck.
I'm gone, and the day we arrive in El Paso is the day that he learned that he was no longer going to be president.
I understand hearsay that when the board summoned him over and told him that, the first thing they threw at him orally was, you refuse to shake hands with an Aggie.
What I learned in UTEP, not knowing that I might have had the same thing, there was a real, real troublesome activist student out there.
He had reporters in the audience to trap me.
Because they were going to take pictures and take notes.
I wouldn't shake his hand.
When his name is called, I clapped.
I did like this.
I said, mi amigo.
And he came over and he said, I wondered if you would shake my hand.
I said, I am so delighted you're graduating.
I can't wait for you to walk off this stage.
That was his response.
He laughed.
We stood there, both of us laughing and smiling.
I share that with many people.
What I learned from those two was give every student what they deserve on that occasion.
be careful to be fair and to be gentle, that if you have a private fight that's different.
Embarrassing someone in public is a treacherous damn thing.
It's not worth it.
Don't we know.
Near the end, what have we not included that we should have?
How about your student days?
There was a character that was around here that was bigger than life named Henry Dittman.
Well, Pinky was too.
I thought you were going to say.
Well, Pinky who?
Henry Dittman.
Pelley Dittman.
Pelley was his nickname.
He was the professor of air science.
He was a bird colonel in one eye.
And he was a patent-like character.
He was a real pain in the fanny to...
to Rudder, the commandant, particularly Davis.
He and Davis were so out of step.
Thinking back to your question about people we were close to, we were close to Dittman, both Hagler and I. In fact, Dittman almost convinced Hagler to give up the Army to go into the Air Force.
But he was fired.
He was a tiger.
He had been grounded.
He had been a pilot, lost his eye, and he was grounded.
He lost his right to fly.
Every time he got near a plane, he'd make them let him fly.
And he was bigger than life, all over this campus, and he was behind all sorts of stuff.
He was constantly attacking the authority of the commandant through the students.
Terrible stuff.
But he was a source of great excitement around the campus.
He was a real character at the time.
After he retired from the service, he surfaced in Houston as kind of the chief of staff of
another John Lindsey, the John Lindsey that was the county judge down there.
He's now the state senator.
And he worked for him for years until he retired again.
But a strong Aggie, loud, opinionated.
This was right after Correa.
And he had this talk he gave, this fire and brimstone talk about always being a tiger.
And he'd talk about the
Turks.
Apparently the Turkish army was totally immune to brainwashing during Korea.
You just could not reach them.
They'd put them in prisons and they'd try to take their leadership away from them and damn somebody else would pop up as a leader.
The Americans would fall apart.
They'd just demoralize them and the brainwashing would then be effective.
This was a big concern in the military right after Korea about our ability to train people to deal with these
these communist military people.
And he talked a lot about the Turks and quite a character.
He was, Bob Kahn told me stories later that says, we used to go out and hunt on weekends.
We'd bring